
ABSOLUM ADKISSON From Roots of Roane Co

 ABSOLUM ADKISSON From Roots of Roane County, TN, by Snyder E. Roberts, page 152 The Adkisson families on Emory River offer a number of genealogical puzles that need solving. The main problem relates to the various spellings of the name, such as: Adkisson, Atkinson, Adkinson, etc. Matt A. and his brother, William Adkisson, have been discussed in connection with their making the Great Seal. The names of these two, and David Atkinson appear on the Roane 1805 Tax List. Matt A. disappeared from Roane records about 1805. The problem is to separate those remaining. It appears that David Adkisson’s children are named in a deed dated 8 August 1810 when he bought 200 acres in Roane "for William , Caty (Adkison) Baskins, Mary Adkison, Joseph Adkison, Jesse Adkison, David Adkison (Jr), "Absolom" Adkison, Peter Adkison, Thomas Adkison, and Yerby Adkison." It appears that David was buying the land for his children Joseph, David Jr., and Absolom served in the War of 1812. The present discussion will be limited to the Absolom Adkisson family mainly based on information complied by Cynthia S. Cooper in 1900 and now in the possession of Mrs. Ted Cofer. ABSOLOM ADKISSON was born 3 March 1793 in VA. He married (1816) SARAH "Sally" ADKISSON (1801-1891). In 1830, Absolom is shown in Capt. Hassler’s militia company in the Swan Pond area, and paying taxes on 300 acres of land. By 1871, Absolom was paying taxes on three tracts for a total of 1296 acres. In 1880, he owned three tracts with 1051 acres; the largest one was bounded on the north by Dickey, on the south by Suddath, on the east by Hester heirs, and on the west by Emory River. Absolom was reputed to be physically large and powerful. Absolom and Sally Adkisson had 12 children as follows: Census 1850 Roane Co. Tn Head's of Family ADKISSON, Absalom, Family # 1534 ADKISSON, Morris, Family # 1566 ADKISSON, Walker W., Family # 1611

Married his sister Sarah "Sally" and had like a dozen kids.?
