== Biography ==Richard Hargrave was  Christened July 21, 1616, All Saints Church, Wakefield, England. (Microfilm - Mormon Church Family History Center, Batch 7728513, Sheet 15.) <ref>Yorkshire Baptisms. ([https://www.findmypast.co.uk/transcript?id=GBPRS%2FB%2F344174017%2F1 www.findmypast.co.uk](accessed [4 September 2020])</ref>
Will dated 21 November 1686 and filed 1687 in Norfolk, VA., Record Book 1694-1709 pg. 313.
"Richard Hargrave of Yorkshire and the New World, 1614-1686" by MarionHargrove, Contributing Editor.
On 2 Jan 1634, Old Style, which in modern terms is 12 January1635, themerchant vessel Bonaventure left London on the morning tide, bound for "the land of Virginia"<ref>merchant ship Bonaventure St Domingo thanVA 1634 passenger list; https://www.packrat-pro.com/ships/bonaventure.htm</ref>.  She was a reasonably large ship,about the same size as the Mayflower, which displaces 180 tons with a length of 90 feet and a maximum width of 24 feet.  She was carrying 166 passengers, most of them indentured servants whose ages ranged from 58 to 4 years. Her firststop was the customs port of Gravesend, 20- odd miles down the River Thames, which in those days was still pronounced the way it is spelled.Customs searchers and a doctor came aboard there, to see that none ofthe servants was being shanghaied or carrying the plague.  There wasalso a Registry Office man to fill out their indentures, and the Episcopal minister of Gravesend to question them all concerning their conformity to the orders and discipline of the Established Church of England.
The seventh man in the lineup was, from his broad accent, a Yorkshireman. He gave his name as Richard Hargrave, his age as 20. When he had passed his test, and signed his indenture, and taken the Oath of Allegiance, he had literally sold himself down the river.
The word "servant" was quite respectable in England, though we would say "employee" instead, and "indentures" were simply an employment contract - voluntary, sensible and fair - adapted from the highly successful apprenticeship system.  Richard Hargrave's agreement was probably with the ship's Captain, James Ricroft, who would sell it to a third party when they reached Virginia. It bound Richard to work, under agreedconditions and restrictions, for an agreed period of time beginning with his arrival there.  The usual term of service at that time was, for persons 20 and over, four years; those under 20, five years; children under 12, seven years.  Ricroft, in return, would supply his passage, food and necessary gear.  And, at the end of the work period, the employer would furnish him sufficient provisions, clothing and equipmentto start out on his own.
For Captain Ricroft the cost of recruiting, transporting and feeding this likely-looking young North Country lout would be L6 sterling at most, and probably closer to L5.  As best I can figure it out, L5 sterling in 1635 would be worth perhaps $400 in the money of today.  Real money, though, was practically nonexistent in Virginia except for a fewSpanish dollars, called "pieces of eight," or an occasional Dutch or French coin.  The real currency was tobacco, cured and in cast, which was still bringing sixpence a pound.  Twelve pounds of tobacco would come to 6 shillings, and 6 shillings was the equivalent of 1 Spanish dollar.  Richard's contract could be sold there for probably 600 pounds of tobacco, representing L15 sterling, a net profit of 200 per cent. Assuming, that is, that Richard got there at all.  The voyage itself wasusually three months of seasickness, overcrowding, rats and lice, scurvy and pestilence, and usually one passenger of every five would diebetween Gravesend and the Hampton Roads.
Those were the odds against the captain.  For Richard, getting there was less than half the battle.  The whole Eastern seaboard of America was one vast thickset forest, so dense that you could smell the pine needles from 150 miles at sea; and a squirrel, they say, could have traveled cross country from the Atlantic to the Mississippi, tree to tree,without ever coming to ground.  The settled portions of Virginia, none of which extended farther than half a mile back from the various rivers, consisted mostly of brackish water, mosquitoes and dysentery.  The year was divided into two seasons: malaria and flu. Often, in the early times, four out of every five newcomers died within a year.
Richard Hargrave survived for more than half a century.  He started afamily that is now enormous, and he was moderately prosperous, and heworried less about the Tidewater climate than about the everlasting flames of Hell.  He started out with great luck, or marvelous timing, orboth.  He came before the days of overcrowded ships and exploited manpower, and sold his labor in a seller's market.
He was obviously bright and personable, healthy or at least very durable.  He was venturesome, and he knew his way around.  That was the Yorkshire in him.  "Give a Yorkshireman a halter," they used to say, " and he'll find a horse."  Whatever future he envisioned, that cold January morning off Gravesend, it did not include the endless chopping of someone else's weed in the hot sun.
Incoming ships were suppose to proceed up the James River to "James City" before breaking bulk, but many captains liked to dawdle awhile atOld Point Comfort and Newport News instead, wetting down old thirst and making deals with old customers before lugging the rest of their stock to the boondocks.  Master Ricroft was not above this sort of juggery-pokery.  In 1631, while still pilot of the Elizabeth, he and severalassociates had been had up before His Majesty's Privy Council for illegal trading in Canada, a monopoly that His Majesty had already sold to somebody else.  Be that as it may, it was at Point Comfort, his first landfall, that young Hargrave favorably impressed Mr. Henry Sewell,a respected merchant of that neighborhood, who straightway bought hisindenture and packed him off to the shop.
Sewell was a churchwarden of Elizabeth River Parish, across the James,and in 1638, after it became Lower Norfolk County, a justice of the county court. His household and his business were at a place still called Sewell's Point. Besides Richard and other employees, the Sewells had an infant daughter named Ann, and there was a Henry Jr. a little later on.  Richard's service there seems to have been mercantile rather than horticultural, and apparently it worked out well for all.  Although Mr. and Mrs. Sewell both died in the winter of 1644, contact was maintained between the two families for at least two generations.
From Sewell's Point, Richard went into business for himself.  He had atobacco crop, of course, because that's what Virginia was there for,but also some sort of rural store somewhere on the Elizabeth River.  The word "rural" is redundant;  except for the malarial little villageof James City, there wasn't a town anywhere in the colony, nor even abrick building until 1639.  It must have been a very small business; although at least a third of the county court's business was in collecting people's debts, it was not until late 1646 that Richard Hargrave got around to suing a creditor, and then it was for 22 shillings 4 pence (say $3.67). Though hardly an enterprise of great pith and moment, that was Richard's first appearance in the public records since Gravesend: twelve years that were the richest and most eventful of his wholelife.  Piecing together later fragments, we can deduce that he becamehis own man in the early spring of 1639, four years after his arrival.
Within a year after that, he married.  In 1642, at the latest, he wasthe father of a son and namesake.  And in October 1646 he achieved what most Englishmen before him never had: he owned the land he lived on.It was a tract of 150 acres, of which perhaps as many as 144 were dense woods and under-brush, on the north side of Broad Creek, on the Eastern Branch of the Elizabeth River.  It had originally been granted toJohn Watkins, who sold it to Richard.  Beginning at a marded pine tree on a point in the creekside, his line extended north-northeast exactly a mile (320 poles) to a gum, thence west-southwest 75 poles to a pine, south-southwest 320 poles to a gum on a point on the west side ofthe mouth of a small gut, thence east-northeast "by  or nigh on" the main branch side to the beginning.  There was another 100 acre piece available on the east side, and Richard was granted a patent for that too in 1652--"by and for transporting of two persons into this colony."
The whole place has gone downhill since then, of course.  A sizable town has sprung up over the past 300 years.  And most of Richard's 250 acres of solid shade have been taken over by a housing development or something, called River Oaks, a mile or so south of the airport, in thecity of Norfolk.

RICHARD IN THE PARISH
Richard Hargrave was a Puritan, and had been, I suspect, since his boyhood in West Riding.  The clothing towns of Yorkshire were full of Puritans.  The countryside, as a rule, was not.
Somehow the idea has got around that the Puritans were a small elite group of the Lord's Anointed who in late 1620 landed in the suburbs ofBoston, where, pausing only to register for the DAR and proclaim themselves the beginning of American history, they quickly ventured in democracy, freedom of worship (for Puritans), Thanksgiving, turkeys, witchburning and wooden nutmeg.  Actually, there were millions of Puritansin England, all of them nominally Episcopalian, but the church had become an arm of the government, and the two were so intertwined that itwas hard to hate the Archbishop of Canterbury without despising the King as well, a vice versa.  Any Englishman who suspected that the Protestant Reformation had somehow passed the English by, or who was at all skeptical about the Divine Right of Kings, was contemptuously defined as a Puritan, a Presbyterian, a Roundhead.
By 1640, it is estimated, about 7 per cent of all Virginians were Puritans. There had been anti-Puritan laws there since 1631, but not veryconscientiously enforced - until things began heating up in England, and the established crowd ("Cavaliers") constantly losing ground to theRoundheads of Parliament, the cities and the army.
In 1642, just about the time King Charles I blundered into open civilwar, he appointed as governor of Virginia Sir William Berkley, "a staunch royalist and a narrow churchman," who kept Virginia a royalist enclave long after Charles had been deposed and his kingdom replaced by arepublican Puritan commonwealth. Sir William persecuted his own Puritans with great vigor and zest.  In 1649 alone, the year King Charles was convicted of high treason and his head chopped off, about 1000 Puritans fled Virginia for Maryland and New England and were replaced thesame year by about 1000 refugee Cavaliers welcomed by Berkley.
During all the demolition and slaughter of the Civil Wars in England,there were colorful little sidelights in Lower Norfolk County.  The minister there was a promising young Episcopal clerk,  Mr. Thomas Harrison.  At one point Harrison had been chaplain to Sir William himself, and parishioners described him as "an able minister and a man of splendid character." But in April 1645 his churchwardens handed up a presentment against him to the county court "for not reading the booke of Common Prayer, and for not adminstring the Sacraments of Baptisme ... andfor not Catechising on Sunnedays in the afternoon."  In brief, they charged their Church of England priest with being a Presbyterian!  SirWilliam and the Council expelled him from his parish.
There was a substitute minister in Lower Norfolk for awhile rotating between the church and the chapel, but apparently he was elderly and /or in ill health. On the Sunday when he was at the church, there weredark doings at the chapel, where "much people (men,women and children)assembled and mett together," and one  William Durand not only read to them but also preached.  One Sunday morning in May 1648, the High Sheriff and two vestrymen went there and broke it up and took Durand into custody - despite the efforts of three men, one of them a vestrymanhimself, to rescue him.
Friends and neighbors were constantly being hauled into court for"notcoming to Church, and obstinately refusing to heare Common Prayer," but Richard himself showed a steady talent for not making waves.  In December 1654, however, he was one of a 24-man grand jury that handed upthe following presentment: "Wee of the Grand Inquest, after due Inquirie made, doe present unto the Court the general breach of the Sabbothday throughout  the whole County, which we conceive is most chiefly occasioned throuth want of a Godley minister amongest Us in the County.Where fore we humbly pray & desire that some speedy Course may be taken to procure and able Minister, lett the charge bee what it will." One source, "Genealogies of Virginia Families," contends this shows Richard Hargrave's putitanical leanings.  If so, it shows them very discreetly, with all 24 jurors on the inside leaning out.
In all these pious and tedious court minutes we get one very brief butreassuring glimpse of Mrs. Richard Hargrave hurrying through.  We don't learn her name, but we are permitted to infer that, like her neighbor Mrs. John Godfrey, she is a competent and reliable young matron ofthe community.  Both were called upon in a civic crisis, dated 15 February 1657/58, involving the good name of a elderly member of the court: "Whereas Mrs. Ann Greene is ajudged to bee very Forward with Child and it is reported that she lays the child to Mr. Bartho Hoskins, uponthe petition of the sd. Hoskins it is ordered that Mrs. Godfrey and Mrs. Hargrave bring her to Bed & also bee Earnest with her to declare onOath in her travail who is the father of it or them, so that your petitioner may bee cleared of the aspertion layd on him, and the parish saved of an unnecessary Burden, the said Hoskins paying the Court Charges." Their Worships' good intentions and pious ingenuity came to naught.  Either Mrs. Greene was too busy for chitchat in her Moment of Truth, since the "it or them"proved to be twins, or Goodwives Godfrey andHargrave were too busy to listen, and poor Squire Hoskins' good name and dignity never got cleared.  For whatever it's worth, Mrs. Greene named one of the babies Willoughby."
Compared to all that limelight and excitement, Richard's appearance incourt that same week seemed humdrum and trivial,  Called to the standin King vs. Church, Assault & Battery, "the deposicion of Richard Hargrave dayth:
"That I beeing abord the pherry saw Mr. Beard and Mr. Church walking on the docke.  Mr. Beard demanded of Mr. Church to deliver him his goods, but Mr. Church answered him, I know no goods you have in this shipp, nor noe I will deliver, unless you bring me a noate under Mr. Lees hand.  Mr. Beard said that is very well.  Mr. Church said you abused the masters Mate & made the seamen drunk abord.  Mr. Beard answered, Mr.Church I wonder that you so mutch forgett your selfe.  With that Mr.Church fell on hime & beate him, & tore the sleeve of his Coate, & further I say nott. (Signed) Richard Hargrave" With a torn sleeve to workwith, even a Yorkshireman can go only so far with a story, especiallywhen he's aware that people would rather hear what his wife has to say.

RICHARD IN THE COMMUNITY
In 1657 Mr. Isaac Davis, "Merchant, of the City of Bristol", was (a) suing the local ship carpenter, Abraham Elliott, for non-delivery of asloop Elliott was supposed to be building for him, and (b) being suedby Elliott for non-return of, and/or damages to, a sloop that Elliotthad lent him for the meantime.  Davis lost both cases and appealed both Equity, but still had use of the loaner. He needed the latter, it seems, for business travel.  Late that week he executed a general powerof attorney to his "loving friend Richard Hargrave of Elizabeth River"to receive debts and merchandise for him, conduct business "in and about the premisses," and hire lawyers if need be. So far as we know, that was the last ever seen of Mr. Isaac Davis.  The record shows that while he was away he was murdered by the indians.
Richard petitioned for, and was granted, administration of the estate,For several months he was quite busy with, and moderately successfulin, numerous routine court actions connected with the Davis estate and his own affairs.  A number of things in the Davis matter - the term"loving friend, the signature of one Arthur Mosley as a witness, Richard's appointment as administrator - tempt one to guess that here werecloser ties: that Davis was perhaps Richard's father-in-law, or brother-in-law.  But I find nothing to bear it out, and apparently the two men were simply partners in business.
Aside from all that, Richard's day in court was always comfortably humdrum. He sued a neighbor, and was sued by another, having co-purchaseda steer with each.  He served on juried, grand juries, inquests, post-mortem, and estate appraisals.  He was paid the usual bounty for killing a wolf.  He was one of two bondsmen for Richard Jr.'s guardianshipof a neighbor's orphans.
In May 1662, when his old employer's orphans were of age, the son-and-heir needed formal identification as such, and called on two impeccable witnesses. One was the midwife at his birth.  The other: "Richard Hargrave, aged about forty and six yeres, sworne and examined saith: That he this deponent was a servant to Mr. Henry Sewell the elder when Henry Sewell the younger was borne, It beinge upon a May day in the morninge and further saith not." Ten years later, when young Sewell died and left his sister as heir, Richard was called on again. His deposition this time stated that he had been "a servt to Henry Sewell merchantwhen Ann the now wife of Col. Lemuel Mason was in her minorrity, and that shee was then and still is the reputed daughter of the sd. Mr. Henry Saywell, and further sayth nott."
Commonplace though they seem, these two statements from Richard himself are the only records we have of his first four years as an American.The 1662 deposition, which says he was "about"  46, may be our onlyvaluable clue to who he was and where he came from.  But that's another story.
In 1676, the year of Bacon's Rebellion, the Virginia Assembly orderedthe installment of two civic improvements at every county jail in thecolony.  In Lower Norfolk, history saith not who was awarded the contract for the new whipping post, nor how many pounds of tobacco he was paid, but the other job went to Richard.  The sheriff was ordered to :
"To Goodman Hargrove for a Duckinge Stoole  00300".At that time the "goodman" was already slowing down, and his place in the community gradually being taken over by his two sons Richard and Benjamin.  In 1674 he had been issued a certificate of four headrights, for having paid the cost of transporting four persons into the colony, which entitled him to 200 acres of land.  Three years later he was back, having somehowmislaid the certificate, and the clerk was instructed to write him out another.

His last appearance, at the end of 1683, also seems befuddled.
Evidently in compliance withe another new law to broaden the colonialeconomy, he brought in 28 yards of linen, "butt hath nott yet made outthat it is of his owne Growth." One cannot help inferring that with advancing age he had lost some of his native sharpness - or, as they would say in the Old Country, his "Yorkshire".

RICHARD IN THE GLOAMING
In the autumn of 1686 Richard Hargrave Sr. was an old man of 72. His wife, I think, had died, and his four children were married, and he hadgone to live with one of them.  Richard Jr. had a wife and a family of at least three. Benjamin had married twice, substantial widows bothtimes.  Margaret was the wife of Samuel Roberts, a thriving farmer ofthe county.  His pet, his daughter Ann, was married to Arthur Moseley,whose family was considered gentry and was so Puritan that, like theMassachusetts Pilgrims, they had migrated here by way of Holland.  They seem to have been in the jewelry business there, and they had a coatof arms and a houseful of grim-faced family portraits, and all of this was impressive to Richard.  Though Arthur was only a second son andtherefore not really a "gent.," he was still Mr. Arthur Moseley, particularly in the heart of Goodman Hargrave.
There had been friction between Richard and Richard Jr., who was comparatively headstrong, stubborn, argumentative and abrasive.  Even worse, in a period when it had become permissible and almost respectable tobe an outright Bible-reading Protestant, Richard Jr. had shocked hisold father by joining what Sir William Berkley used to call "this mostpestilent sect of the Quakers."  As far back as Summer 1678, RichardSr. had signed all his land over to Ben, who was not a troublemaker, and gone to live with the Moseleys.  Ben, to his credit, immediately gave the original 150 acres to Richard Jr.  In 1682 Richard Jr. had beenbrought into court for failure to have one of his children baptized,and, in his typical bizarre and outrageous Quaker fashion, refused theCourt's order to do so now!  Six months later he posted his name at the courthouse door, "signifiing his intent to depart the Country," andsubsquently moved up the James River to Surry County.
On 21 November 1686, Richard Hargrave Sr. made his last will and testament. In unflinchingly Puritan prose, he bequeathed his soul "to Almighty God my Creator and Redeemer, Who first gave me being and life, andby whom I expect a glorious resurrection at the Last Day."
To Richard Jr. he left a breeding sow. To Benjamin, one broadaxe and apruning axe.  To Margaret went his treasured sermon book, "An Abridgement of Dr. Preston's Works", London, 1648. (John Preston, 1587-1628,was a staunch Calvinist whose sermons and writings had been enormouslypopular when Richard was a boy in the West Riding.) Except for these"three above small legacies," the rest of his personal estate was leftto the Moseley's.  Some time in December, Richard Hargrave died, a very long way from where he had started.

- D. Stephen Hartgrove
Houston, Texas


Notes:
British colonization of the upper South was shaped by many geographicfactors, principally the numerous harbors and river routes that led inland.  The first tiny group of settlers in America, who were left on Roanoke Island in 1587, vanished without a trace.  By 1607 the first permanent settlement, at Jamestown was undergoing its terrible trials. One by one, Williamsburg, Richmond, St. Marys and other settlements came int existence, but in the next century and a quarter English colonizers had scarcely crept inland beyond the Tidewater lands to the Piedmont.
http://content.ancestry.com/Browse/BookView.aspx?dbid=19731&iid=dvm_GenMono004556-00025-0&sid=&gskw=&cr=1
Suffix IV Alt. Birth Abt 1612 Wakefield, West Riding, Yorkshire, England  [3] Born 1614 Wakefield, West Riding, Yorkshire, England  [3]Christened 24 Jul 1616 Wakefield, West Riding, Yorkshire, England  [3]Gender Male Immigration 2 Jan 1634-1635 , Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States  [3]
Sailed on the ship Bonaventure (his age was given as 22)Died Bef 21 Nov 1686 , Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States  [3]  Submit Headstone Photo Age 72 years Person ID I81866 Full Tree
Father Richard Hargrave, III,  b. Abt 1575, Sowerby, Halifax, West Riding, Yorkshire, England ,  d. 1634, of Wakefield, West Riding, Yorkshire, England    (~ 59 years)  Mother Mrs. Richard Hargrave,  b. Abt 1590, Sowerby, Halifax, West Riding, Yorkshire, England ,  d. Yes, date unknown Married Abt 1613 Wakefield Church, West Riding, Yorkshire, England  Family ID F35909 Group Sheet
Family Mrs. Richard Hargrave,  b. Abt 1614, of, Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States ,  d. Bef 21 Nov 1686, of, Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States    (~ 72 years) Married Abt 1638 of, Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States  [3] Children>1. Richard Hargrave, V,  b. 1639, of,Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States ,  d. 15 Apr 1705, South Wark,Surry, Virginia, United States    (66 years) 2. Benjamin Hargrave,  b. 1648, , Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States ,  d. 3 Mar 1704/05,, Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States    (57 years) 3. Sarah Margaret Hargrave,  b. 1651, , Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States , >4.Elizabeth Anne Hargrave,  b. 1653, , Lower Norfolk, Virginia, United States ,  d. 1703, , , Virginia, United States    (50 years)Last Modified 17 Aug 2010 Family ID F35908 Group Sheet

Genealogical Research of Kirk Larson.

==Research Notes==The Hargrave family were white immigrants from England who moved firstto Virginia in 1635 and eventually settled in Guilford County and Davidson County, N.C. The collection includes bills, receipts, and a list, 1824-1866, that document people enslaved by the Hargraves and freedmen who became tenant farmers; financial materials, 1787-1921, including deeds for plantation land near Lexington, Davidson County, N.C., androutine bills and receipts; and letters, 1839-1918, some from familyfriends, one of whom moved to Texas; another who had witnessed ZacharyTaylor's 1850 funeral in Washington, D.C., and wrote about the political climate in the capital; and another who was serving with Americanforces in France during World War I. Also included is an 1899 catalogfrom the Premo Camera Company and several photographs of the 1899 harvest at the Hargrave farm.<ref>https://finding-aids.lib.unc.edu/catalog?f%5Baccess%5D%5B%5D=online&f%5Bcollection%5D%5B%5D=Hargrave+Family+Papers%2C+1790-1918</ref>


== Sources ==
<references />
* https://www.geni.com/people/Richard-Hargrave-IV/6000000008248436477* Source: <span id='S12'>S12</span> Type:  Vital Record Title:  England & Wales Christening Records Date:  1530-1906* Source: <span id='S82'>S82</span> Type:  Web Site Author:  One WorldTree Title:  Johnathan Tippett Hargrove URL:  ancestry.com Date:  March 2009

=== Acknowledgements ===* WikiTree profile Hargrave-64 created through the import of PERRY Family Tree 9-29-11.ged on Sep 29, 2011 by [[Perry-1658 | Lisa Perry]].* WikiTree profile Hargrave-56 created through the import of Davidson_Fink.ged on Sep 26, 2011 by [[Davidson-1387 | Shayne Davidson]].
Bethune: Family Research of "Mickey" Marianne Ernestine Williams Peterson, Peterson, Marianne Ernestine Williams, (Email Documentation & Hardcopy(internet, Marianne Ernestine Williams Peterson  Sun 12/17/00 12:42 PM); Hard copy package of documentation received Fri 01/05/01 by USMail.).
