== Biography ==
She has been reported born on 2 NOV 1646<ref> Unsourced One World TreeTitle:  Johnathan Tippett Hargrove March 2009</ref> in Lower Norfolk,VA yet perhaps more likely in Surrey or Charles River Co (became York), the later where her widowed mother, Mary ----  married Joseph Ham <ref> Joseph Ham Will 1637/38</ref> after her father's, John death in 1678.  Her father further patented 150 acres in 1652 in Winter Harbourwhich might be the same one on the bay in Matthew, a short distance northeast of York Co. This would have been a safer locale after the 1622massacre near Hopewell and near where her grandfather had immigratedand retreated to the east afterward. In 1652 after her birth john Peadis recorded to have brought over Mary Pead as well as a John Matley<ref>George Cabell Greer, Clerk of VA State Land office in "Early Virginia Immigrants, 1623 -1666", Richmond 1913. Page 253; https://archive.org/details/early-virginia-immigrants-1623-1666/page/n7/mode/2up</ref>undoubtedly Lower Norfolk.
She married Richard Hargrave (b. abt1645) of Lower Norfolk and Surry Counties before 15 May 1693 in Norfolk Co. when he '''"petitioned in right of his wife Pembroke, one of the daughters of John Pead, deceased,for a portion of her father's estate in the hands of William Griffin,who married the said Pead's widow"''<ref>Norfolk Deeds, Bk. V, reverse Orders 2 Dec. 1682-18 Sept. 1695 not paged</ref>. Further it appearsshe married before 17 Aug. 1682 when Richard was before the Court forrefusing to have a child baptized. They moved to Surry County by 10 June 1685.
It is thought she may have been a widow of Thomas HARDIN who she allegedly married in 1664<ref>Unsourced Nancy Gilstrap Mann 2019; https://sites.google.com/site/gilstrapandersongenealogy/home/maternal-anderson-lines/pead?authuser=0</ref> and had two daughters, Ann and Mary. On 16Aug. 1681, orphan Anne Harding complained that Richard Hargrave, Jr.,kept her out of her lands.
Richard was among the tithables in Surry County on 10 June 1685 <ref>Surry Wills, Deeds and Orders, 1684-1686, p.62</ref> and his estate isdescribed in Surrey Co. 1705<ref>Surry Wills and Deeds, 1694-1705</ref>.
She died about 1693 in Surry Co., VA and he in 1705{{citation needed}}.

== Sources ==
<references />*Mike Marshall in "Early Colonial Settlers of Southern Maryland and Virginia's Northern Neck Counties"; https://colonial-settlers-md-va.us/getperson.php?personID=I30933&tree=Tree1
== Acknowledgements ==*WikiTree profile Pead-24 created through the import of Davidson_Fink.ged on Sep 26, 2011 by [[Davidson-1387 | Shayne Davidson]]. See the [http://www.wikitree.com/index.php?title=Special:NetworkFeed&who=Pead-24*WikiTree profile Pead-26 created through the import of PERRY Family Tree 9-29-11.ged on Sep 29, 2011 by [[Perry-1658 | Lisa Perry]].
