== Biography ==He was born in Lower Norfolk probably on/near Masons Creek before 1658, the son of John Pead (Bef 1638-15 Apr 1678) and Mary MNU Pead (Bef 1642 - Aft 1678)<ref>Mike Marshall "Early Colonial Settlers of SouthernMaryland and Virginia's Northern Neck Counties"; https://colonial-settlers-md-va.us/getperson.php?personID=I30930&tree=Tree1</ref>. He wasnamed in his father's 4 Feb Will in Norfolk Co 15 Apr 1678WP <ref>NorfCo Wills, Bk 4 Fol 30</ref> with his brother, John, unnamed mother and siblings who was a Cattle farmer.
He left a will on 14 Apr 1719<ref>"In the Name of God Amen, I, WilliamPead being very sick of body but of perfect memory thanks be to Almighty God for it. I do make this my last will & testament. First, I give& bequeath my soul into Lord Jesus Christ hoping in & thro him for pardon & redemption of all my sins & my body to ye earth from whence itwas taken to be buryed at ye discretion of my Exrs & if on my worldlygoods as followeth:-It: I give & bequeath unto my son John Pead all myland & one shilling in money in full of his portion:-It: I give untomy daughter Mary Wilder one shilling in full of her portion: It: I give unto my son Wm Pead one shilling in full of his portion. It: I giveunto my daughter Martha Lowery one shilling in full of her portion: It: I give unto my daughter Dinah Pead one cow & calf & two ewes & one feather bed & bolster which lies on & three pewter dishes & one young horse & a saddle & one iron pot which holds abt. three gallons & two hoggs of my old ash barrows & half a dozen of pewter spoons & one chestin full of her portion. It: I give unto my daughter Eliza Pead one feather bed & bolster & three blankets & a sheet & one cow & ... & one ewe & lamb & three pewter dishes in full of her portion. It: I give untomy daughter Jacomin Pead one feather bed & bolster one rugg on blanket one sheet one cow one ewe & one lamb three pewter dishes in full ofher portion: and one mare & leave to the sold ... pay to be divided between my two youngest daughters Eliza & Jacomin. It: I give unto my sone Leml Pead all ye remai... portion of my estate making him whole Execr of this my last will & Testament. My desire is also that Lemuel keep ye plantation till Christmass next. In witness whereof I do hereuntoset my hand & seale this 14th day of Aprill, 1719.... William (his XXmark) Pead & seale"</ref> in Princess Anne Co, VA<ref>Will of Wm Pead; Princess Anne Co Deed Bk 3, p.230</ref> naming his children:
#John Pead
#Mary Pead
#William Pead
#Dinah Pead
#Martha Lowery
#Elizabeth Pead
#Jacomin Pead
#[[Pead-220|Lemuel Pead (abt.1690-aft.1761)]]
In 1695 he had 40acres in Norfolk Co. on the ''"Southside of the Damms"''<ref>1695-1706 Cavaliers and Pioneers, Patent Book No. 9; [Nell Marion Nugent]; Page 4WILLIAM PEAD, 40 acs., Norf. Co; S. side of the Damms, adj. James Thelabell; 25 Oct. 1695, P. 17. 17 acs.part of patent to Giles Collins & Thomas Adams, 6 Jan. 1649; by Collins sold to John Pead, 5 Mar. 1659, who bequeathed to his son John, whodying without issue sd. land become due to sd. William, his brother &heir at law; 29 acs. now taken, for Imp. oft Esther Dangerfield</ref>.

== Sources ==
<references />
