Peter Morrison I was born in Virginia 17 Sep 1772, married Ann, moved to Wilkes County, Georgia and had John, Joseph, Mary Ann (Arnold), Rhoda (Grace), William Hammer, Frances P. (Faires), Peter W., Benjamin Franklin, Susanna Ann (Gresham), and David (not necessarily in that order).In the early 1800s Peter moved his family to Lauderdale County, AL.His first wife, Ann, died there and he remarried to widow Mary/Polly (Kellough) Young in 1823.She also died and he married a third time in 1844 to a widow with children, Ann Perry/Terry.When Peter died in 1854, he was buried in Wesley Chapel Cemetery in Lauderdale County. You can see his tombstone on FindAGrave.com, memorial #79891865, and also find links to some of his family.

The children's names come from an 1856 Probate Court document in which Jared Gresham (husband of Susanna Ann Morrison) requested to be appointed administrator of Peter's estate as a replacement for the originally-named administrator, James Gresham, who was Jared's son and Peter's grandson. James had died in 1855 before settling the estate affiars.Several of Peter's children died before he did and the document names "children of ..." (Mary Ann, William Hammer, Rhoda Grace).

A summary of this probate document is:"PETER MORRISON ESTATE - March 1856, Lauderdale Co. Ala. Jarred Gresham, Adm. (James P.Gresham had died a year earlier.) Heirs: Ann Morrison, widow, $3.54; Peter, Benjamin, Joseph, John, David and Frances Morrison (wife of Eli Faires); William Hammers children; Rhoda Grace's children; Mary Ann Arnold's children; and Jarred Gresham each to receive $5.41. Jarred also received $67.70 as Adm."

Frances P. Morrison married Eli Faires in Lauderdale County, AL and moved to Haywood County, Tennessee.They reared their four children there and died there.They are believed to be buried in Chestnut Grove Cemetery (unmarked graves). Daughter Mary Ann Faires married Newton Hamilton in 1841, but I have no more on her; other children were Martha Jane (McMurry), George Washington, and Susan Caroline. George and wife are both buried in Chestnut Grove Cemetery. Martha Jane married William Harvey McMurry; they moved in Reno, Kansas, had 8 children, and she died there in 1907.

It is known that 2-3 of Frances Morrison's brothers also died in Haywood TN, but we do not yet know which ones, except for William A./Hammer Morrison who died 1834; he and his daughter Elizabeth are buried there in Old Salem (Whitehead) Cemetery; he was married to Lucy.

Two more of Peter's children moved first to Madison County, TN, then to Arkansas -- Peter W. and Benjamin F. Morrison.These brothers married sisters, Eleanor/Ellender and Margaret Callison (transcribed as Collison in marriage records of Lauderdale County).

Susanna Ann Morrison and husband Jared Gresham lived out their lives in Lauderdale County AL and are buried there.